OK, the tape is rolling. OK, first of all, could you tell me if you, as a
youngster, did you come from the fan structure in science fiction? No, my
experience with science fiction was very solitary for most of my period of
growing up. I discovered the area of the fantastic. I think I can trace back to
when I was eight or nine years old when I found some old Edgar Rice Burroughs
novels in my grandmother's back closet and one by one read them and became
entranced by it. That was followed by a, period during the thirties, when the
pulp adventure magazines were at their height. And my father and his brothers,
my uncles, would buy these 10-cent magazines and bring them home and I would
read them. Mostly they seemed to prefer the pulp
hero magazines like Doc Savage and operator number five and the spider and the
shadow and magazines of this kind of which I, you know, G8 is battle laces. But
eventually I discovered a secondhand magazine store in Kansas City where I was
born and grew up. And when I finished reading the magazines, I'd take them down
to this magazine store and trade them for science fiction magazines, which I
then devoured. so I grew up not really knowing any other science fiction readers
my brother, older brother, read a little but not with the enthusiasm that I did
so my first contact with other readers, much less
other writers was after I'd been writing for four years I was aware that there
was this fan structure because in some of the magazines like Startling Stories
and Thrilling Wonder Stories and even in Astounding, there would be letter
columns with the names of people. Gradually, I began to recognize a few of them
and I realized that there were other readers, but it wasn't until I attended the
World Science Fiction Convention of 1952 which was held in Chicago and I was
urged to go by the company I worked for at that time a paperback publishing
house for whom I was supposed to be their science fiction expert and they
suggested they pay my way if I went to the 60-80 miles down from Racine,
Wisconsin to Chicago and attend the convention to make contacts and that was my
first experience with really meeting other readers and other writers and agents
and editors and the whole paraphernalia of the science fiction world. Okay,
good. Can you recall the circumstances? I believe it was in 1949, of your first
published story. Yes, I had
read science fiction, as I said, from oh about the age of 8 or 9, and read it
seriously for a while during the middle 30s. And at the age of oh about 15 or 16
I had written some science fiction stories, though with no particular skill, and
I usually, like most beginning writers, didn't even finish most of them. I can
only remember one that I finished.
But then the college came along, and the war came along, and I got involved in
both of them, and it wasn't until after I'd come back from service and gotten my
bachelor's degree and had actually had about a year of graduate study, that I
decided to try full-time writing. I had been interested in theater, playwriting,
but I decided I didn't want to get a degree in that in the speech and theater
area, but I was fascinated by the notion of radio writing. So I returned from
Northwestern University to Kansas City with the notion of writing a series of
half-hour radio dramas based on Kansas City history and getting some local radio
station to produce them. And I actually wrote four of these and did the research
for them and so forth, and then went around to the radio stations and found out
that not any of them were interested. so i had a wife to sport and i sat down
and wrote the kind of thing that i've been reading all this time first time
seriously and wrote a story called paradox which i sent off to astounding and
astounding set it back then i sent it off to amazing and amazing set it back And
I sent it off to Thrilling Wonder Stories, which was the third magazine that had
been unstarved in stories that were published by the same chain. And one day I
got a letter back saying, I like your story, Paradox, and I'll pay you $80 for
it. So I thought, marvelous. I'd really stumbled onto something that was
tremendous. And so I meanwhile had been writing another story, which was a story
called Communication, and I created it the same way I sent it off to Astounding
first and I think maybe I sent it off second after I got rejected by Astounding
to Throwing Wonder Stories and the same editor Sam Merwin Jr. bought it and that
was the story which happened to be published first in Startling Stories in
September of 1949 where the first story I actually wrote which is Paradox, was
published the following month in Thrilling Wonder Stories in October.
You didn't have to go through a long process of getting rejection slips then,
did you? No, as a matter of fact, sometimes when I talk to aspiring young
writers, and they turn to me and they say, how many rejection slips did you get
before you finally sold a story? And I look a little sheepish, because I know
it's not the answer they want. And I said, I sold the first story I ever really
wrote seriously. And their faces fall. And then I follow it up immediately by
saying, but of course Ray Bradbury had 75 to 100 stories rejected before he sold
one. And look what he got to. Yeah, okay. This next question, I'm not quite sure
how to phrase it, But I've always been fascinated by the
split in your relationship to science fiction. You know, it seems to me that you
must have at one time made a decision to be an academic and to be a writer at
the same time. I wonder if that was a hard decision or if you ever considered
full-time writing. I did, as a matter of fact, write full-time for a period of a
little more than three years, It was a year in 1948, 49, and I went back to
school then and got a master's degree, but I continued to write. And then after
I'd worked for this paperback publisher, after I got my master's degree, worked
for a paperback publisher for a year and a half, I found out that I'd sold four
stories that I hadn't known about and decided to go back to full-time writing.
So I did write full-time from the fall of 1942 until the late summer of 1955.
And really much of the groundwork for the later books that I published and the
success that I had, I think, such as it was based upon that freelance period. I
didn't make a lot of money at it, below the poverty level, but my needs were
fairly simple at that time and what it later paid off in the sense that the
stories that I wrote appeared in books and some of them even were made in the
movies and all that sort of thing. And if I'd had the money for them at the time
I was writing them, I would have thought I was very well off indeed. But it was
after 1955, or in the fall of 1955, after my wife and I had moved back to
Lawrence, Kansas, simply as a place to live, but I got involved, almost by
accident, with teaching at the university from which I'd gotten my two degrees
at the University of Kansas, and became involved with other aspects of the
university, edited the alumni magazine for three years, and then became director
of public relations for the university for 12 years before returning to full
-time teaching and writing in 1970. But looking back upon it, I know, I think
right from the beginning, I had the feeling that I wanted to do criticism in the
area. My first 10 stories, for instance, were published under a pseudonym of
Edwin James. I began to use my own name with the 11th story. But the reason that
I can remember now for doing that was the fact that I thought I would write
criticism about science fiction and I wanted to save my real name for that. But
after 10 stories, I decided that was foolish. and I ought to use my real name
for everything. But looking back upon it, I think the academic interest was
there right from the beginning. Okay, that's interesting. I want to ask you,
obviously, a couple questions, at least on your criticism. But first, could you
give me sort of a brief overview of the things that you do at the University of
Kansas that involve science fiction? I imagine it's probably one of the most
active university science fiction programs in the country, if not the most
active. We have a lot of things going on. I've been fortunate to have found a
colleague here, Stephen Goldman, who is interested in science fiction, although
his basic academic discipline is the medieval, period. it's a strange
phenomenon. I think that a great many science fiction academicians
have their expertise as medievalists. I don't know what the connection is, but I
suspect that there is one. But we also, because of our interest here, I think
have attracted some graduate students who are interested in the area, some of
whom have gotten degrees not in science fiction because we don't offer one, but
in science fiction-related areas. I have one graduate student now who's doing
his dissertation on my work and another one who graduated last year who did a
creative dissertation of a book of science fiction stories. So we have had that
body of graduate students who have taught science fiction classes at the
sophomore level as one of the required courses in composition and literature.
And I also traditionally teach a science fiction course, an undergraduate and
graduate science fiction course each year, although my primary duties in the
English department are the teaching of fiction writing. Perhaps our most
interesting science fiction offering, however, is the three-week Intensive
English Institute on the teaching of science fiction that we offer in the
summer. we realized a number of years ago that there were a lot of people faced
with the task sometimes self-assumed sometimes assigned of teaching a science
fiction course and they were largely unprepared because there had been no
academic program on science fiction certainly not on the teaching of science
fiction So we set up this intensive three-week workshop to offer teachers the
opportunity to attend and get a six-credit-hour program in science fiction, all
aspects of science fiction, in just three weeks. It's a very intensive
experience. We bring in several science fiction writers besides myself. This
year we're having Gordon Dixon and Theodore Sturgeon and Frederick Poole, and it
has been a most successful and satisfying experience. This summer the Institute
will be held from July 5th to July 23rd.
okay, by the way I am a medievalist myself too that is kind of strange but my
field is medieval literature too is that right? why do you think medievalists
are attracted to it? I don't know, I never thought of it until you just
mentioned it I know half a dozen people Tom Shippey who is an English
medievalist who teaches now at Leeds University I know the editor of Pocketbook
Science Fiction, David Hartwell, is a medievalist with a Ph.D. in medieval
literature, and I think there must be a number of others. And I think my own
feeling is that medieval literature perhaps requires the same kind of world
construction. of imagination, and, you know, building up an entirely new world
out of different concepts, much like science fiction. At least that's the theory
that I'm proposing. Well, that's interesting. Yeah, okay, I never thought of it.
Okay, listen, we teach a class here at Odessa College, and we use the Road to
Science Fiction series, which I consider to be a very valuable and unique
endeavor. Thank you. It's something we needed. I'd like to ask you just a couple
questions on that. First of all, for that particular approach to science
fiction, was there any kind of impetus or idea that caused you to start that
series? Maybe it'd be best to give you a kind of history of its development. I
had, when I first went back to full-time teaching, had been asked if I would
teach a science fiction course, which is different from the experience at most
universities where there is some resistance to the notion of doing that. And I
accepted because I had the feeling that there wasn't a good history of science
fiction and that this course would give me the incentive to write it. So I sat
down and wrote very fast and ended up with 13 chapters representing about 13
lectures for the 14-week semester.
And these chapters, or these lectures, became the 13 chapters in a book of mine,
which appeared in about, I guess it was 75, after some delays, as alternate
world the Illustrated History of Science Fiction. And it did reasonably well.
There were some problems with its publication and so forth, including the
delays. But it is still remembered today in spite of being out of print as being
one of the best histories of science fiction, complementing Brian Aldis' Billion
-Year Spree, which he was doing at the same time, but his book came out a couple
years earlier but as one consequence of its publication I got a call one day
from an editor at New American Library who was admiring it and asked me if I'd
like to do a book for them My initial reaction was that I felt that we needed a
good collection of essays about science fiction and I proposed a book of these
rather fortunately I think for me it was turned down at New American Library and
they said they'd rather have some stories and I knew also that that I really
felt the need for anthologies which covered more than the brief span of the 20s
to the 60s which most anthologies did, and there really wasn't much in the 20s
or 30s, most of it covered the period of the 40s and 50s. So I said yes, and I
sent them a proposal for the first volume of the Road Science Fiction. At that
time, all we knew that there would be would be one volume, which covered the
period from the earliest prehistory of literature, not to mention science
fiction, up to 1900, and the H.G. Wells' early stories and novels. By the time I
got finished with the manuscript, I had felt that it really, unlike most books,
came out even better than I thought it was going to, and I propose that we go
ahead with a second and third volume. They said, let's wait and see how this
does, and eventually, after it had done better than they thought, they agreed
that I could go on to volume 2 and 3, which covered the period from 1900 to
approximately 1940, and then from 1940 to 1970 or 70, actually the latest one,
76 I think. And I did those together, but by the time I got to the third volume,
I realized that I wasn't going to be able to get in everything that I wanted and
suggested we go ahead and do a fourth volume. But they said, well, let's wait
and see how these do. As a consequence, however, of the fact that these did very
well, or well accepted. They finally agreed that I could go ahead and do a
fourth volume, and I've just completed that, sent in the manuscript, and the
fourth volume Road to Science Fiction is scheduled to appear in October of this
year, and it will cover the period overlapping a little bit with Volume 3, the
period from 1950 to 1981.
The last volume is going to be a little different from the first three, however.
The first three are on a historical basis, as I've indicated, and you have
noted, with much of the emphasis being on the development of science fiction and
the stories generally selected or the ones which were important in the
development of science fiction or typical of a certain period or a certain
style. In the more current story, this is much more difficult to determine. You
can't really say what stories are important until much after they've been
published, and you can't certainly say which are typical until you decide what
the period really stands for. So what I did in the fourth volume was to select
stories that I thought dealt with the literary uses of science fiction. and so
that the volume is primarily concerned not with questions of generic importance
but the question of literary uses
okay that was a very complete answer in fact you probably got a couple of my
next questions with that one
let's see could you just say in volume one could you briefly comment on I think
the idea or the concept behind that particular volume was that before science
fiction could exist, that man had to discover that there was a future and there
was such a thing as progress. Could you briefly explain that? Yes, it seems to
me that the essential nature of science fiction is that it deals with change. In
fact, in order for us to recognize a story or a novel as being science fiction,
we have to identify that part of it which is different from here and now. our
everyday world. And so it deals with how people would react in changed
circumstances.
So, up to approximately the time of the Industrial Revolution, the very concept
of change itself was alien to human minds. For most of humanity's history, it
seems to me, and of course as a medievalist, Maybe I'm venturing into your area.
But it
seems to me, looking back over the history of humanity, that mostly people saw
change as being only the eternal circle of the seasons changing from spring to
summer to fall to winter and back again, or if there was change in people's
circumstances, it was usually change for the worst. That is, the king would die
and the empire would be thrown into turmoil or there would be war lost or run or
barbarians would come in pillaging and burning and killing and other kinds of
terrible things, or there would be droughts or plagues or all sorts of bad
things. But so as a consequence throughout most of man's history that if there
have been legends and myths of a golden age which man once existed in and from
which humanity has been expelled or has degenerated or deteriorated. And it
wasn't until the investor revolution and, of course, the scientific perceptions
that preceded it and accompanied it, and which began to create change that
people saw could be beneficial. over which they might be able to exercise some
control. That is, it was man-made change created by human desires and
intelligence, and it could be controlled by humanity's exercise of intelligence.
And it seems to me that science fiction was the literary response to that
recognition.
fine okay um i've noted that in each volume you seem to have a you know a
unifying concept like for the second volume it would be the idea that that man
had to consider himself as a species right in science fiction the third was that
uh we have to have an open mind about the universe and man's fate for science
fiction to exist uh does the fourth volume have that kind of unifying idea
behind it and what would it be? No, what it deals with and those themes really
kind of happened in the first three volumes and when you run into coincidences
like that you feel like something is going right it really happened when I wrote
the first introduction to, or the introduction to volume one, and I realized as
I wrote this introduction that I was setting down three basic requirements and
that these basic requirements for the existence of science fiction, the
recognition of humanity as a species and so forth, somehow fit in with my
concept of how science fiction had developed. And so from there, I picked it up
for volume two and volume three. But I think in this current one,
the genre already has been established by the time we come to 1950, and that now
the major considerations are not generic so much as how are we going to write
it? How are we going to express the ideas, and what ideas are we going to
express, considering the fact that we already have a genre to deal with?
How are the first three volumes sold? Reasonably well. For this kind of book,
the mentor books at New American Library are intended
to be primarily academic books. They also issue them on the mass market, but
they don't expect a major sale on them. And all three of them, at the present
time, or as of six months ago, all three of them have already sold over 30,000
copies each. And they will keep them in print sometime, expect to sell more, of
course, particularly with the issuance of the fourth volume. but they expect,
you know, the average mentor book only sells about 20,000, so it's already done,
you know, all of it's done 50% better than the average book.
This is sort of a general question. Feel free to answer it as briefly as you'd
like. Why do you think there's a need? I think you do think there is, a need for
science fiction, criticism, and scholarship.
I think that a category of fiction like science fiction, I hate to continue to
use the word genre because it's not really traditionally a genre. It is a set of
conventions and a set of expectations. But in this particular area, which has
largely been ignored by the apparatus of criticism in this country and in other
parts of the world as well, because it's not been considered important enough to
merit criticism. It's considered to be a pulp literature, a popular literature,
and in a sense beneath criticism. And as a consequence, it has developed largely
under its own impetus without any kinds of efforts of critical minds to look at
it and try to appraise it, say, what's good and what's bad according to some
kind of standards that can be established, and as well to teach, to help the
other critical areas of English literature to appraise it differently, to
understand that unlike other kinds of literature, science fiction has special
things that it does and has special ways that it does it, and to appraise
science fiction by the same kinds of standards that you apply to traditional
literature, science fiction is always going to come up short. It doesn't do the
same things. It deals not with characters, but with change. And so it seems to
me that there needs to be two different routes, or there are two desirable ends
for criticism. One is to educate the non-science fiction part of the literary
world to the special requirements of science fiction and its special
accomplishments. The other is to exercise and apply a set of standards to
science fiction itself to improve the breed, so to speak. Okay, fine. I only
have two more questions on this particular line that I've been following. Your
book, Alternate Worlds, I didn't have a real specific question on that. I've
used it as a research aid, and found it very useful. Of course, I read Brian
Aldis's and Donald Walheim's and so forth, histories of science fiction. Do you
think there's room for any more histories of science fiction? Well, they're
still coming out. And, you know, whether there are any more needed, I suspect
that as these books get dated, new appraisals are necessary. And indeed, if a
new kind of perception of science fiction emerges, there certainly needs to be a
reappraisal of the history that is to either support it or refute it. I don't
know that we really need more history. I suspect that maybe in another 10 or 15
years, maybe a new history will be more needed.
Fine, okay, my other question this is one we ask all of the authors that we talk
to and it's sort of a touchy subject with them it has to do with the relation
between science fiction and mainstream I read some of your ideas on it and I
can't quite make up my mind I think in one essay I think it was the one that
appeared in Bretner's book you said that science fiction and the mainstream were
becoming closer but that you thought that perhaps it would be a good idea for
science fiction to keep its unique qualities. Whereas in another piece, I think
it was the introduction to Breaking Point, you said or implied that it was a
good idea that they do come back together where they belong and that they should
blend. I wondered if you could specify your feelings about that. Well, I guess
maybe I do have mixed
notions about it.
I think that existing separately, science fiction, has attained certain kinds of
strengths
created by isolation, but also certain kinds of weaknesses. But I also think
that the mainstream of literature has certain qualities and selection processes
that could benefit science fiction. I guess the ideal, and I think in a certain
sense it is happening, the ideal would be that good books ought to be published
essentially without generic identification. And they are being so published. I
think if you look around at the significant new novels that are really selling
well, like the Dune books or like Gregory Benford's newest novel, Timescape,
they aren't really published generically. They are being published as novels
which can find their own readers. And as a consequence, the latest, I guess, God
Emperor of Doom, sold something like 200,000 copies in hardcover, which makes it
a best-selling. It certainly would not have that kind of sales as a science
fiction book, and it is not being published that way. At the same time, I would
say that I would hate to see the genre itself.
be totally merged into the mainstream so that it couldn't be identified because
I think it has certain kinds of strengths that might well be lost. And if every
book wasn't able to seek a particular kind of audience that could identify it,
there would be much less science fiction written and much less read. So I'd like
to see both things happen simultaneously. I think they are happening. It also
has some drawbacks to it, too, currently, in that if science fiction has the
capacity to sell as bestsellers,
then editors and publishers are going to be looking at all books that are
submitted to them, all science fiction books, to see if they have the best
seller in them. And many, I think, mid-range books, which once would have been
published without question, are now being rejected because they do not really
have the potential to be as rewarding as some of the others.
Okay. If you're still doing okay, I think I better move on to some of your own
work. Fine. I did have some more ideas about the criticism and so forth, but I
better be selective here because I did want to talk about your own work too. The
joymakers. I guess it's hedonics, how you pronounce it. That's how I pronounce
it. Right, okay. If I remember, their premise was that the basic freedom is the
freedom to be happy. Mm-hmm. Okay, now, obviously, I read the book and I know
the answer to this, but could you just briefly tell me where the flaw is in that
reasoning? Well, and I really worked my way through it, having gotten the idea
for a basic science of happiness, from an article I read in the Encyclopedia
Britannica and sort of work my way through the notion
that happiness, you know, could be achieved scientifically, directly rather than
through things that we think might make us happy, like love or fame or money or
success or whatever we think, you know, might make us happy.
and essentially, this article that I read pointed out to me something that I
don't know whether I would have thought about or not. Maybe I would have, that
there are basically two ways to be happy. You can either get what you want,
which will make you happy, or you can want what you get, and that means that you
have to discipline yourself so that no matter what happens, you're happy because
you are the kind of disciplined person who doesn't let his happiness depend upon
external events. And that, of course, is a kind of stoicism. And I saw this as
being the two holes upon which I could rest a philosophic approach to the notion
of happiness. ultimately as it worked out in the novel it turned out that the
people who wanted happiness to get what they want since the what one can get in
the external world is limited by the number of people and the number of people
who want this particular thing ultimately they get what they want by being fed
illusions that they get what they want and ultimately everybody ends up floating
in amniotic cells living on dreams of success and accomplishment fed by a
machine which eventually works out to be that you're happy when you don't want
anything anymore and it occurred to me that that is the same as death and
ultimately the equation for that, is that happiness equals death, and that life
is still wanting something.
Okay, as I was nearing the end of that book, and saw what you were getting at, I
got the impression that you were saying man was not meant, or he was not created
to be satisfied, his nature is not such, and I wondered if you... Yeah, well
certainly my feeling about it comes in a sense from a story about Candide, which
I read many years ago, that Candide was walking along a country road and saw a
woman, and I don't mean Candide, I mean Voltaire, the author of Candide.
Voltaire was walking along this country road and saw a peasant woman working in
the field, singing happily while he was walking along, overcome with the cares
of state and the problems of intellectual difficulties, and he said to himself,
wouldn't it be wonderful if I could change places with her and she could have
all of my knowledge and misery and I could have all of her ignorance and
happiness? And he responded, no. He said, I wouldn't trade that for an instant.
He said, if the choice is happiness versus knowledge, He said, I'll choose
knowledge every time. And it seems to me that people only think they want to be
happy. That what they really want is knowledge. Not just abstract knowledge.
They want knowledge, and they will pursue knowledge even when it makes them
unhappy. And I have incorporated this in a number of books. Campus, for
instance, has the same kind of theme.
I also got the impression, though, maybe I was wrong here in the work Faust I
think that the bargain Faust makes with the devil is that if the devil can ever
satisfy and make him totally happy then he's lost and he goes to hell you didn't
have that in the background either? no, I don't think so of course I know the
Faust legend and the various literary works based upon it But I wasn't really
thinking of Faust at that time. What I was really thinking of more than anything
else was the fact that it was the Voltaire concept and the feeling that people,
I guess the basics, my own basic feeling, that people only think they want to be
happy. Okay, let me just move on briefly to the immortals. would I be right in
presuming that to be your best known book? Well probably because of the
television series it may be the best known although certainly the listeners is
also very well known. What was your reaction to the TV series? Oh I thought it
was a total disaster and that's not uncommon of course but the resemblances
between the novel and the book are very slight. My book starts with the immortal
being a drifter who comes in and sells a pint of blood and then disappears for
the rest of the novel until the very end. And the television series is all about
the immortal and his being pursued, and eventually it turns into simply another
search for the papers another fugitive somebody is being chased but it makes no
real difference why he's being chased he's being, could have been he had a
fortune or a secret or a Maltese falcon or anything else okay listen and David
was...